Good afternoon.
This afternoon. Yeah.
Before we start the teaching again,
correct your motivation.
Um
the main topics
presented in this 37 practice
text is about relative and ultimate
bodhicitta.
And up until now
we have profound explanation of relative
bodhicitta
which is taken
on the suffering of others exchanging
yourself with others and correct
engaging in um what do you post post
meditation practice etc.
As you know the essence of relative
bodhic jetta is love and kindness,
compassion
uh and patience.
Uh practice and related bodhic jetta
involves
cultivating the intention to achieve
liberation for the benefit of uh
all beings.
and actively engaging in compassionate
actions.
So it has two main aspects aspiration
and action
relative bodhichata.
Aspiration and action bodhichata
relative. Now here we are going to start
with the with teachings on ultimate
bodhicitta. Okay that is the 22nd verse
explains the practice of ultimate
bodhicitta.
It says,
"All appearance are your own mind
and mind itself self permanently
transcending all mental fabrications.
Knowing this in the face of dualistic
notion of subject and object and not
engaging is the practice of bodhic
satta.
So the question is why is this ultimate
nature called bodhicitta?
The reason is that when you recognize
this ultimate nature of the mind, you
will automatically
uh develop a great compassion for all
beings.
Because you will see that all those
who lack this realization
have the same nature as you.
And you will see their suffering
from disturbing emotions
that results from not knowing their true
nature, the ultimate nature mind.
You will then automatically develop
great compassion
for them
even though they have this great nature
we call Buddha nature right but they
don't know they don't understand they
don't recognize the nature mind and then
they're suffering
from disturbing emotions
that result from not knowing their true
nature. So then you can see through your
wisdom
then you develop great compassion.
That's why it's called ultimate
bodhicitta.
The definition of bodhic jetta
is both compassion and wisdom. Right?
The essence of relative bodhic jetta is
compassion.
The essence of ultimate bodhic jetta is
wisdom.
So that's why relative and ultimate
bodhic jetta is inseparable.
So the first line here all appearances
are your own mind
it means
things you your your eyes see things
your ear hear right as well as all
the thoughts feelings and
uh um
experience and dreams that appears in
your mind.
Buddhism believe
mind is creator.
Your mind is creator.
We normally believe um
all this you know thoughts, feelings and
all this
these things truly exist.
Therefore we create attachment
um and all the other emotions.
So the first first step in understanding
the nature of reality is to realize that
all these appearances are nothing other
than your mind.
First step. The second step in in in
understanding the nature of reality is
to realize that mind is not anything
other than emptiness.
If you fully realize these two points,
then you will develop the wisdom
which relies the true nature of
phenomena.
And once you have the ability to
recognize the empty nature of mind, then
your attachment
um or whatever will not arise when you
see something beautiful
and your anger will not develop whenever
it come you know it come across anything
that is unpleasant.
So
whenever a thought arise recognize it
as being empty
and then that thought will immediately
lose its power
and will not generate attachment, anger
all this
There's no way we will ever get rid of
attachment and anger as long as we keep
believing that they truly exist.
The more we attempt to reject the
external things,
the more they will come back at us.
So it is important to recognize the
empty nature of your thoughts
and then simply allowing them to
dissolve into their nature.
And teach it says you know looking
looking at the mind
there is nothing to seeing
nothing
you see the nature
the essence of all the Buddha.
told
if we can't tame our own mind,
there's nothing to tame outside of us.
And this is Buddhist belief, right?
So from an ultimate bodhicitta
perspective,
all these appearances of um disturbing
emotions,
thoughts and so forth are not our main
problem.
It's not it's not the appearances
uh themselves that bind us.
But it is the disturbing emotions and
thoughts that we create that cause us to
remain in samsara
and prevent us from achieving
liberation.
Uh so
the second line says
mind itself
primordally transcend all mental
fabrications.
Some practitioners
may have believed that when you realize
the nature of the mind
then at that point the mind becomes
transcendent.
But that is not the case. The mind's
nature itself is totally
beyond beyond change.
So it cannot be improved by realization.
If you examine the mind in your
meditation, you will recognize that the
objects of attachment and anger
have no true existence.
And through ultimate bodhicitta
meditation,
you will be able to overcome
creating cause of samsara
through attachment and anger.
And everything that appears
you know pure or impure exists
relatively
because of mind
and
and the relative uh uh vision of the
mind.
All this
everything that appears you know um pure
impure all this
relatively exist because of mind right
but we do not find all existence if we
search for it and uh ultimate sense
Okay, I'm not going to talk about how to
search for this thing. Now, the third
line says dualistic notion of subject
and object.
Are you looking at the text? Okay.
Dualistic notion of subject and object.
It refers to
perceived and perceiver, right? The
perceived is the outer
perceived object
and the perceiver is the inner
perceiving mind.
It is just like a dream in which
um objects seem to arise
yet nothing that appears
has any true existence.
So if the outer perceived object is just
like a dream appearance
then what can we say about the inner
perceiving mind?
The text says that the mind itself
transcend transcends all mental
fabrications.
With this recognition we can give up
clinging to dualistic appearances.
Only then we will be able to accomplish
this practice.
So meditating on ultimate bodhicitta,
letting the mind become peaceful
and staying in a meditative state of
stillness,
free from thoughts
and then recognizing the empty nature
mind within that state of calm is the
essence of meditation practice.
Do you understand this is a little bit
don't worry as long as long as you focus
on relative bodhic jetta aspiration and
action
um you will understand the ultimate
bodhicitta
sooner or later.
Now the the next verse
When you encounter objects that please
your mind
though they appear beautiful like
rainbows in the summertime.
Does rainbow appears winter time?
Oh, you're right. Sundog
that's not rainbow.
Do you know how many colors of rainbow?
Wrong.
Okay. Okay. I don't know.
Beautiful like rainbows in the
summertime.
Oh, that's your mind.
Okay. It says that beautiful like
rainbows in the summertime, not
regarding them as real and giving up
attachment to them is the practice of
bodhic sattva.
Okay. the the the
22nd verse above was an explanation of
the
um meditation practice associated with
ultimate bodhicitta. Right?
This verse um speaks of how we apply an
understanding of emptiness towards
uh beautiful objects
during uh kind of the past meditation
and how we learn to properly
relate it to experience of pleasant and
unpleasant objects which
if not practiced properly will create
attachment
or anger. Right?
So when we see, hear, smell or taste
something beautiful,
right away we think, "Wow, this is a
beautiful
and then become attached to it.
But here the text says when you
encounter objects that please your mind
see them like rainbow in the summertime.
See, rainbow is vivid and
um
captivating
but intangible. Right? Similarly,
objects or experiences
that bring um pleasure in life are often
beyond our control.
Whatever it is that that that you are
perceiving
is in that sense beautiful and desirable
just like a rainbow.
It's totally uh it's totally
insubstantial.
um
insubstantial and um
this is
true of many other objects of attachment
including people, thoughts and um
ideas.
So anything we experience
as an experience
and its nature has not has has no true
existence. Therefore it says here giving
up or give up attachment to them.
Again, it doesn't mean denying
their existence
in an actual sense, but rather
recognizing that their appearing beauty
is just temporary just like rainbow.
And by seeing them as a temporary thing
um then we can reduce the uh tendency to
cleaning um these objects.
So this is how bodhic sattvas um deal
with um uh with external things
either pleasant or unpleasant and how
they practice
um nonattachment
when they see uh something beautiful.
You can see something beautiful but
it says give up attachment to when you
see something beautiful.
So bodhic sattas training themselves
uh to see them as just like rainbow
um which uh you know displays beauty but
uh have no inner value.
So when you see something beautiful,
attractive
but understand its true nature.
It doesn't
stop you seeing the beautiful things
but stop strong attachment to it.
So if you have realized the true nature
of something first,
it makes big difference to your um your
um
way of way of dealing with it.
So when you realize emptiness,
this does not mean that you reject all
appearances, right?
But its purpose is to stop this um
exaggeration of uh the object by
ignorance when uh it appears to your
mind. So you can stop uh stone
attachment and anger
and make your mind totally free.
And now the next verse um
[Music]
deals with the situation of when you
encounter something unpleasant.
This verse deals with something that you
see beautiful
things. Right?
So 24th
All forms of suffering are like the
death of a child in a dream.
To take such delusion is real. How exa
exhausting.
Thus when encountering difficult
circumstances
seeing them as delusions is the practice
of bodhicattvas.
What is the the bottom line? The the
point is we have to free our mind
either through practice through relative
bodhicitta or ultimate bodhicitta.
So this verse deals with when we meet
difficult situations.
Of course we do encounter lots of uh
lots of um pleasant things as well as
unpleasant things. All right. So when
things go well
there is a there is a tendency to feel
arrogance
and look down on others
and when things go poorly
there is a self uh criticism right
criticism and looking down on yourself.
So both of which cause suffering for
yourself and those around you.
So this is part of the
uh human condition I say
influenced by ego.
So it is important not to
not to treat this this experience both
pleasant and unpleasant as a as a
substantial.
Um
and both you know pride and self-doubt
are temporary. So
do not
let either control your inner peace and
cause you to
disrespect yourself or others.
So it says here all forms of suffering
are like the death of a child in a
dream.
So in your dream
for example, your child dies
and you go through a lot of suffering
from losing your child.
But when you wake up,
you realize that there was no child
there in the first place.
So why were you so upset about the child
dying?
Similarly, so this teaching suggests
that the suffering you experience in
your life feels overwhelming
and real in the moment
and harms you.
But ultimately it is it is uh it is in
in insubstantial
when you view it from the perspective of
ultimate truth.
So then it says to take such delusions
as real. How exhausting
it means
exhaustion. Huh? It means when we
to take such delusions are real. How
exhausted? It means when we uh fixate it
on our suffering as something something
real something solid
and believe it to to be to be truth.
We exhaust ourselves all the time by
frustration, fear, sadness, unhappiness.
Right?
So for bodhic sattvas,
their practice is not about
uh not about denying suffering.
Instead,
it's about recognizing
that suffering arise from our
perception,
attachment,
and mistaken
view of
mistaken views of life.
And by understanding that difficulties
are like illusion or dreams,
bodhic sattvas can face challenges.
And at this moment
we may not have capacities like bodhic
sattas do but at least
my teachers always say we should reflect
every morning
how lucky
I am to be alive.
And whoever sees me, hears me, touches
me, dreams of me,
may that be the complete cause of their
happiness.
Morning.
And during the post meditation
meditation section
in ordinary life
they say we should try to engage in the
practice of the six perfections
six paramas try to be generous
uh focus on discipline
be patient
and so forth for the purpose of
achieving enlightenment for all living
beings.
And on top of that, if you are able to
meditate on ultimate bodhicitta,
you will be able to understand the
reality of suffering.
So therefore even if you suffer
your suffering will be like the death of
your child in your dream.
It appears
but it has no existence. It's just a
dream.
So when you wake up the dream ends.
This is how bodhic sattas handle their
emotions when they are faced with either
you know joy or unhappiness.
Body surface of course go through very
difficult lives and challenges but they
they really know how to handle
so then it doesn't matter.
Okay. 25th.
Okay.
It says for enlightenment for
enlightenment if it is necessary to
sacrifice even your body
then what need is there to mention
external objects
thus practicing generosity without hope
of
what reciprocation or
positive result is the practice of
bodhic satta
l
means reciprocation
n is um positive result.
Okay, keep that in mind. Uh so from here
the um
this is the sixth section of the text.
uh W to
talks about how to practice the six
perfection Sanskrit six paramas right
which is uh part of the uh cultivation
of both relative and ultimate bodhic
chitta uh of the bodhic surface.
So the six the sixth are the um uh
uh what do you call it? Um
the the the principle practice in which
bodhic sattvas engage when they practice
action bodhicitta.
So first we start with uh generosity.
It says for enlightenment if it
necessary to sacrifice even your even
your body.
So if it if it is necessary to sacrifice
even your own body for enlightenment
you should.
it is valuable.
Then of course giving up external
possessions
um
should not even be a question.
So if it is our intention to achieve
Buddhahood the enlightenment then there
is no question that we must be prepared
to be um generous.
Uh this shows that true spiritual pra
practice
uh requires
a deep level of detachment
and um selflessness.
The practice of generosity is one of the
six perfections
in the bodhic sattva path. Right?
So it says practice and generosity
without hope and reciprocation on
positive result.
This is a very special
motivation.
In Buddhism,
true um generosity is not about
expecting
or receiving,
you know, recognition or rewards or
positive
karmic benefits,
nothing like that, right? But it is
about giving purely out of compassion
and for the benefit of others.
So
gener pure paramuta pure generosity it
has to be done without any concern for a
reward of any kind of to to the giver.
The bodhic sattas want to help all
beings. So they cultivate this kind of
giving without attachment.
So this teaching encourages us to be uh
generous in in everyday life not just
only with you know for example with
money or possessions but with with your
kindness or with your time
and effort
uh without
expecting anything in return.
So true generosity
arises from a mind free from attachment
and ego.
And the essence of generosity is as
Shandanda Dewa says simply
the intention of giving away anything
based on the realization of
nonattachment
and the realization of the suffering of
others. That's all. Therefore the
essence of the perfection of generosity
is about realization of nonattachment.
That's that no more. Then 26th verse.
[Music]
If discipline is lacking,
you cannot even benefit yourself.
Then your wish to benefit other is
laughable.
Thus
maintaining discipline free of desire
for worldly existence is the practice
bodhic sattvas.
In Buddhism, discipline is one of the
fundamental
foundations
for
mental clarity and ethical conduct.
So it says here if discipline is
lacking, you cannot even benefit
yourself.
Then your wish to benefit others is
laughable.
in Tibetan laughable.
So if we are
uh
undisiplined
right undisiplined
um
our efforts to help others and ourselves
will be
will be be harmful.
So we have to constantly remember
uh to um to arouse body bodhic mind for
our actions.
If we wish to help others um we it says
we must first you know cultivate
self-disipline
and
um inner uh strength.
The bodhic sattas practice
discipline
um not for personal gain but out of u a
deep commitment
uh to the well-being of uh all sentient
beings.
It's so important. Discipline
comes when we observe our thinking
and observe our action.
It comes
it with the mindfulness discipline
that is absolutely necessary in our
daily life.
So discipline is um constantly watching
with a sense of awareness of our own
reactions. And and
um
and this
constant watching
brings
great discipline.
Without
discipline
teacher say you know we will not be able
to guide people to the right place
and with discipline we can reduce
negative thoughts, negative words,
negative conduct.
negative uh motivation and so on. So
discipline is necessary in our daily
lives. It brings not only
uh long-term spiritual result but also
gives
meaning to this life. So when we
talk,
eat
uh with discipline, mindfulness,
then there is no chance to harm others,
make others unhappy with discipline.
Right?
So that's the action bodhicitta.
Practice action bodhicitta.
Okay, that's a that's second parameter.